Welcome to the Explainer.
Today we're gonna talk about how millions
of people experience the web, but not by sight.
We're talking about sound.
We're diving into the world of screen readers. Okay?
So what a sighted person sees
and what a screen reader user actually hears.
Well, they can be two totally different things.
You've got this beautiful visual design on one side,
but the screen reader, it's all about the plain
text you see on the other.
And the thing that connects these two worlds,
that's the accessibility tree.
Yeah. A screen reader doesn't see your design
and the way you and I do, it doesn't
care about the colors or the layout.
Instead, it reads the code,
that underlying structure we just mentioned,
the accessibility tree.
And what it does is it announces the key info
for every single element.
You know its name, its role, is it a button, a link?
And it's state like is it checked or disabled?
So how does someone actually get
around the page with this thing?
It's not just one simple method on a desktop.
Users have two completely different modes
for two very different tasks.
And honestly, getting your head around this is probably one
of the most important concepts for understanding
how screen readers work.
And this right here, this is the core idea.
You've got browse mode, which is for well browsing,
you're reading, you're scanning.
Think of it like reading a book. Then you have focus mode.
That's for interacting
with things like when you need your keyboard
to actually type inside a form field.
That's focus mode. And screen readers are
actually really smart about this.
They give you these little audio cues,
so you always know which mode you're in.
Take NVDA, A really popular one for Windows.
It plays a little high pitch tone when you land in a form
field that tells you, okay, you're in focus mode now,
and when you leave, you get a low pitch tone.
All right, you're back in browse mode.
Okay, so knowing that these two modes exist, it kind
of raises a big question, right?
How do people actually use them to navigate a page?
Do they just start at the very top
and listen to every single word all the way to the bottom?
The answer to that is a huge resounding no, absolutely not.
And the data on this is wild.
It will completely change
how you think about designing a webpage.
It turns out that less than 4%, 4%
of screen reader users actually read a page
straight through from top to bottom.
And this chart, this is the big aha moment according to tons
of survey data from web aim.
Look at that over two thirds of screen reader users find
what they're looking for by jumping from
one heading to the next.
That's it. That is their number one way of getting around.
So here's the absolute key takeaway. Your heading structure.
It's not just some nice to have
for SEO for screen reader users.
It is the navigation system.
It's how they build a mental map of your page.
A power user isn't gonna arrow down through everything.
They're just gonna hit the H key to jump from heading
to heading to heading HH.
That's it. And this idea of navigating by structure,
it's not just a desktop thing.
It's absolutely crucial on mobile too, even though
how it works is a little bit different.
So on your phone screen, readers like voiceover on iOS
or talkback on Android are basically always
In browse node.
You don't have that whole mode switching thing going on.
And instead of keyboard shortcuts, it's all about gestures.
On an iPhone, for example,
a user does this cool two finger twist gesture on the screen
that brings up something called the
rotor, which is like a menu.
They can set it to headings and then just swipe up
or down to jump from one to the next. Super efficient.
So what does that mean for you?
It means that the semantic foundation of your design,
your headings, your landmarks, is just
as critical on a tiny phone screen
as it is on a huge desktop monitor.
That rotor on iOS
or the reading controls on Android,
they're completely useless if there's no structure
for them to navigate through.
Now, Look, the goal here is not for you
to become a screen reader expert overnight, not at all.
It's about doing a simple check on your own work.
It's about building empathy, not
by pretending you have a disability,
but by actually understanding
how the tool works with the thing you built.
So here is a super simple actionable test you can do.
Like right now, just turn on your computer's built in screen
reader, go to your page
and just press the H key again and again.
Does it jump you through the content
in a way that makes sense?
Then pull up the elements list.
It's just a keyboard shortcut,
and that will show you a complete outline
of all the headings on your page.
And when you're looking at that list,
just ask yourself this one simple question,
does this list look like a logical table
of contents for the page?
Or is it just a flat confusing mess?
Seriously, if you can answer that question,
you'll catch the single biggest
and most common navigation problem out there.
Doing this simple test really moves you from only seeing
your design to truly hearing it,
and that is a fundamental shift.
It helps make sure that what you create isn't just pretty,
but that it actually works for everyone.
So the question I wanna leave you with is this.
What will your design sound like?